software Engineers were being overvalued
before and now we're just correcting for
what makes sense this was probably
closer to what the expectation was back
in 2018 everybody was just throwing
money at you these so-called Tech Bros
were making upwards of 300,000 400,000
and even half a million dollar as Junior
and mid-level Engineers this is me back
in 2018 a fresh new grad from W Madison
I had just landed a job as a junior
engineer at a data analytics startup in
Chicago and it was fully remote at the
time I got to travel and live in Greece
making $75,000 a year while paying $300
a month in rent which was insane to me
at the time my hours were flexible and
every evening I got to explore the rich
culture of a beautiful European city
life was good to say the least 2020 was
more about like having so many job
opportunities like I would get LinkedIn
messages from recruiters like twice per
day it was great especially considering
where we are now you're probably in a
position where you were told that
becoming a software engineer was the
answer to having this grandiose life a
life of flexibility High pay the ability
to challenge yourself and even carry a
little bit of prestige that came along
with the title so I wanted to talk about
whether or not there's still some truth
to that narrative can you still make
$300,000 total compensation packages in
the Bay Area and even eat free food on a
freaking campus what's my honest advice
about becoming a software engineer right
now well let's break it
down to start we need to define a tech
bro what the heck is a tech bro let's
find out so an educated male lacking in
social skills who also happens to work
in Tech many of them are Libertarians of
course who SIM for Elon Musk and or
people trying to reinvent the wheel with
some dumb new technology and then the
example they give this
is the tech bro with this new blor score
3,000 people will easily be able to get
around the city without a car Alice says
please stop trying to reinvent the train
so that's an IDE what a tech bro is
clearly Tech Bros have a bad rap but
deep down they were the Envy of the
internet these so-called Tech Bros were
making upwards of 300,000 400,000 and
sometimes even half a million dollars as
Junior and mid-level Engineers they were
making Day in the Life videos about how
amazing their lives were how they barely
did any work and how they went on lavish
vacations all the time I mean seriously
when do they even work but here's the
thing social media doesn't always show
the entire picture we all know that when
you see these glamorous videos of people
coasting by in Tech and making a lot of
money there's actually a lot of Blood
Sweat and Tears that go into the whole
process that isn't actually being shown
to earn that coveted Tech bro label you
typically have to go to a good
University study leak code for hours go
through several rounds of interviews and
then keep up with the demands of work
and politics long enough to get promoted
now I'm not defending Tech Pros
necessarily I'm just saying that there's
a lot more to it than eating free food
and getting massages every day at work
and I hate to say it but most people
would hate actually doing the work
required to get these glamorous jobs the
perks actually make it look easier than
it is so what does this have to do with
becoming a software engineer now well
first I'm just trying to create
transparency over what it felt like to
be a software engineer back in 2020
people have a very distorted view of the
market today because they didn't really
know what was going on back then all
they had for reference was the videos
they were watching online which again
was overg glamorized the common Tech bro
even though it's cringey to admit was
actually creating some sort of value
otherwise Zuckerberg wouldn't bother
paying his Engineers upwards of $500,000
a year don't be fooled by the
relatability content for working 2 hours
a day and dragging yourself out of bed
to actually get to work at 11:00 a.m.
that's not actually true okay so is it a
good idea to become a software engineer
now what all has changed between then
and now well a lot and a little as we
mentioned earlier the tech firm life
wasn't exactly what we expected this was
probably closer to what the expectation
was back in 2018 oh wait you guys can't
see that hold on one
second okay so this was closer to the
expectation learning quickly and
managing time with your manager so in
2020 you were expected to learn quickly
as is any software engineer but honestly
you weren't necessarily expected to
learn at a pace where you were working
extra hours there was more flexibility
around that next one medium productivity
so that means a PR every week and I
think every week is probably not that
much it really depends on your team too
but having a couple PRS a week I think
that would indicate okay you're
semi-productive on the team you could
Coast to some extent but of course you
still need to have an understanding of
the code base and learn and participate
in those weekly discussions with your
team next show up to the team meetings
and participate in conversations again
this is kind of self-explanatory you
just participate in the conversations
just observe what's going on a lot of
times actually even the first two years
of my career I didn't really speak much
in meetings and I did get feedback that
I should speak more but when I didn't
really have much to say I mean I did my
work I showed up on time I didn't really
have much to say there reasonable
flexibility on deadlines also honestly
there was a lot of reasonable
flexibility back in 2020 I think if
something wasn't going to get done and
you communicated with your manager the
manager would be really good about
allowing you to push the deadline back
now not so much and lastly autonomy with
your development and testing so again
back then you had a lot more freedom
over how your work was going to get done
and when it was going to get done again
the when part is more about that and
movable deadline but how you get your
work done was totally up to you you
could work asynchronous a lot of times
you didn't really have to show up to all
meetings if you didn't feel like they
were relevant there wasn't that much
accountability in terms of time spent at
the job but there was a little bit more
accountability on what work you ended up
getting done so that was totally up to
you okay so how exactly has this changed
so now you no longer get to manage time
with your manager you need to manage
your time with AI I think that's really
important kind of also self-explanatory
AI is taking the market like a storm so
you need to know how to use tools like
co-pilot like Aug looop like all these
different internal tools that your
company will probably use try to use
that to 10x your productivity okay now
because of
AI you can no longer do PRS every week
you have to do PRS pretty much every
other day honestly so probably four to
five times a week you probably can't
read my writing but four to five times a
week for PRS I think that's pretty
normal especially given that you're
using AI tooling that's the new
expectation you can no longer just show
up to these meetings you actually have
to participate in them and you have to
actually bring a lot of value in terms
of system design in terms of programming
all of these technical skills are now
something that you have to Showcase out
loud to your teammates and the
reasonable flexibility on deadlines you
can say goodbye to that because that's
no longer the
case now deadlines are a lot tighter and
you're not going to get as much leniency
you're most likely going to have to come
up with a very valid excuse if you have
to push the deadline back otherwise
you're going to have to talk to your
manager manager to help them understand
what's going on so if that means working
longer hours typically that's the
case and lastly autonomy with your
development and testing say goodbye to
that because you're going to be
micromanaged a lot more so that's kind
of the biggest difference with that
aspect you're going to want to get used
to someone breathing down your neck and
I think that's a normal part of the
process especially when you're working
in a market that doesn't value you as
much
anymore so you might look at these
differences and think okay what's the
point why would I want to be a software
engineer when seems like so much more
effort to make the same amount of money
that people were making just 2 years ago
doing 20% less well you could think
about it like this the market that we
were in before was a unicorn that wasn't
normal people were making tons of money
they were traveling they had no
accountability and of course I don't
want to negate what I said earlier the
tech Bros did make it seem too good to
be true and there was still a lot of
work to be done you didn't have to study
do elad code problems to get into these
tough companies once you had the job
though conditions were a lot better than
a lot of other professions you didn't
have to show up for 24 hours a day like
a doctor and you didn't have to spend
hours after work looking at briefs like
a lawyer you did have a lot of
flexibility and autonomy and freedom now
if you think about it it just feels like
a normal job that's the main thing
that's changed right there's less demand
for you and so you're treated as such
and that's just a normal thing in the
market and I think we have to come to
terms with that it may get better over
time but I don't want to promise
something that I actually don't have any
control over either i' really hope like
in the in two three years we're like
done with the layoffs and we are back to
not the 2020 phase I don't know if that
will ever happen again but like go back
to some sort of normaly so that's kind
of the way that you can look at it where
the market has just normalized it hasn't
gotten worse and if you keep that
positive mindset it'll help you find a
job moving forward so the question we've
all been asking ourselves is it still
worth it to stay in Tech and my humble
opinion yes it still is hear me out the
main thing is you should stay in this
industry for the right reasons we've
already seen the people that have joined
Tech just for the money so the biggest
perk I would say working in Tech I would
say the money like I know somebody else
might tell you like it's so exciting to
problem solve like okay it's all great
but if I have to pick one thing like I
think money is great that my friends is
the wrong reason sure you'll make money
in the beginning but you'll work for 5
years until finally you realize that
you're burnt out you're not enjoying the
work and you hate your co-workers only
do it if you're somewhat passionate
about solving problems every day and
learning new technologies pretty often
because this is the type of job where
you're going to continuously learn new
things I know there's different levels
to software engineering but because
things come out so quickly sometimes
Junior Engineers might be the experts
compared to principal engineers and
you'll just have to get used to that now
that being said we did go over the new
expectations for being a software
engineer in 2024 yes it's going to feel
more like a job than an everyday party
but honestly it should feel like a job
software Engineers were being overvalued
before and now we're just correcting for
what makes sense you'll still be
compensated well you'll still get free
food if you're in the Bay Area and
you'll still have a decent amount of
flexibility for context when I started
in the industry I could not even work
from home for a single day I had to sit
in traffic for 1 hour a day each way
every single day I know the horror the
fact is what we have today is still a
luxury but in order to keep this luxury
you just have to work a little bit
harder to get it it's not dissimilar to
being a doctor a lawyer or psychologist
those jobs are actually a lot more
physically demanding and in terms of
your hours spent a lot more demanding on
that side as well yes like Tech may not
have great work life balance or at least
the image of a great work life balance
but when you compare it to other
Industries other jobs it is actually
pretty solid you it can get better than
this in my opinion in this rule you'll
just have to show that you're more
competitive and driven to actually get
things done a little bit quicker than
you're normally used to and again you
also have to be driven to use new tools
um AI to stand out from the crowd so
those are my two cents on what it's like
to be a software engineer and if you
should become one if you were thinking
about it so hopefully my advice helped
I'll see you in the next one
